SIMD-0082: Relax Transaction Constraints (#82)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0082-relax-transaction-constraints.md

---
simd: '0082'
title: Relax Transaction Constraints
authors:
  - Andrew Fitzgerald (Solana Labs)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-10-30
feature:
---

## Summary

> This proposal aims to relax some of the constraints on which individual

Reviewer: > to relax some of the constraints

to clarify, "relax" means "removal"?

Author: The constraints still exist in the sense we need to check "can this transaction be executed". They do not exist for the validity of the block.

Right now, those 2 different types of constraints are overlapping. I need to re-write this proposal with @lheeger-jump's suggestion on making it very explicit that these 2 things are different.

transactions can be included in a valid block.
The proposal does not relax the constraints required for a transaction to be
executed.

## Motivation

The current protocol places many constraints on the structure and contents
of blocks; if any constraints are broken, block-validators will mark the block
as invalid.
Many of these constraints are necessary, but some of them are not, and lead to
additional complexity in the protocol.
This proposal aims to relax some of the constraints at the individual
transaction level, in order to simplify the protocol, and give more flexibility
to block-producer and block-validator implementations.

More specifically, this proposal aims to relax the constraints which require
account state in order to determine the validity of a transaction's inclusion.
The reason these constraints are targetted specifically, is that reliance on
account state necessarily requires synchronous execution within the protocol.
This proposal on its' own, will not enable asynchronous execution, but it will
remove one of the barriers to asynchronous execution.

> 

Reviewer: A bit confused by "aim" in Summary section and Motivations here. As "aim" seems to yield benefit to block producer ("...transaction can be included..."), which is not part of protocol; while Motivation talks about modifying protocol. 

Is it correct yo say this proposal has two parts: 
1. remove listed constraints/requirement of transaction for block producer to include them into block; this part solely in Producer implementation, does not modify protocol;
2. instead of invalidate entire block at earlist failure of transaction due to named constraints, validator only _not_ execute bad transactions but will continue validate the block. (bad transactions included in ledger). This part of protocol altering.

or maybe I am thinking on wrong track?

Author: I think only your 2nd point is included in the proposal. Block-production changse are enabled by the changes in the proposal, but not required beyond potential changes to the fee-colection.

> instead of invalidate entire block at earlist failure of transaction due to named constraints, validator only not execute bad transactions but will continue validate the block. (bad transactions included in ledger). 

yes. Those bad transactions may end up having limited effect if we are still able to collect fees, or if we decide to make the block-producer cover those fees. They will not be executed though.

----

Proposal does not suggest or require the block-producer to make any changes, but allows for changes. For several of the constraints, the producer is still incentivized to perform the checks (fee-payer, nonce) because otherwise they will not receive rewards for those transactions. There's freedom in how that is done, and the block-producer could potentially do this in a non-strict fashion.

I'll cover this in the updated prop, but essentially block-validation and consensus really consists of 2 primary questions:

1. is this block valid?
2. what is the result of the block?

The changes here are intending to make answering this first question, "is this block valid?", a simpler process that does not require executing the block. This proposal separates these questions logically, but w/ current voting we still require the 2nd question, "what is the result of the block?", be answered synchronously.

## Alternatives Considered

1. Do nothing
    - This is the simplest option, as we could leave the protocol as is.
    However, this leaves the protocol more complex than it needs to be.
2. Relax all but fee-paying constraint
    - This was actually the initial proposal, but it was decided that it would
    be better to relax as many constraints as possible, rather than just some.
    Any reliance on account state, means the protocol requires synchronous

>     execution.

Reviewer 2: To clarify, "it would be better to relax as many constraints as possible" just means that the fee-paying constraint is _also_ removed right? I think you could say that directly here.

3. Additionally, relax the address lookup table resolution constraint
    - This was considered, since it is a transaction-level constraint that is
    depdendent on account-state. However, due to entry-level and block-level
    constraints that rely on the address lookup table resolution, this
    constraint cannot easily be relaxed without also relaxing those

>     constraints.

Reviewer 2: I don't really understand why there is still a constraint for address lookup tables. If the lookup table is invalid for some reason can't validators just charge the fee payer some fees?

Author: ALT resolution contributes to constraints at higher levels i.e. entry and block.

Entries need to have non-conflicting transactions (without adoption of #83).
Blocks are required to not exceed account write limits (currently 12M CUs).

In both these situations, if we allow ALTs to not resolve I think the behavior becomes very unclear. Do we only consider the static accounts? all resolvable accounts? no accounts?
Not clear to me any of those options is ideal or makes sense. I think we'd like to remove this constraint eventually, but I think it probably makes more sense to do after these complicating entry and block constraints are also removed.

Reviewer 2: I see, thanks for explaining what the entry and block constraints are, I hadn't considered those. FWIW ALTs were designed to be apend only and the warmup time (currently one slot) is configurable by the runtime and can be increased in the future if it helps bankless leaders manage a cache of ALTs. So I think we could try to move forward with removing this constraint.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

> Specifically, this proposal relaxes constraints that a transaction included in

Reviewer 3: This list seems to mix "constraints on transactions which invalidate entries and blocks" and "constraints on transaction execution which invalidate the transaction". The list should be split up or the ones of the latter type should be removed.

Author: That's a very fair comment, as that is something is changing with this proposal. Currently, the list of constraints that invalidate the block is a superset of those which invalidate execution. That will no longer be the case, and I should make that more clear.

a block must:

> 1. Have a fee-payer with enough funds to pay fees

Reviewer 3: This list seems to denote the _current_ status of constraints on transactions. This is useful background, but we need to precisely specify the new constraints on transactions.

Reviewer 3: ... in a separate list.

Author: Bit confused on what you're suggesting would make the document more clear here; this proposal does not add any new constraints.
The list here is an incomplete list of the constraints on transactions, it is only the constraints that are being removed/relaxed.

Reviewer 3: The list describes what the constraints are now, but does not explicitly list what the relaxed constraints are. Consider that I or another FD dev needs to stare at this and implement the exact rules for what defines a valid transaction.

> 2. Have a valid nonce account, if specified

Reviewer 2: Did you consider that both normal transactions and durable nonce transactions can only be processed once to be valid? Validators and bankless leaders can use the status cache to avoid including normal transactions more than once, but they need to check that the nonce is valid or not to avoid including durable nonce transactions more than once.

Author: Considered, but I need to rewrite sections of the proposal to be very explicit.

Status cache should still be used to avoid including transactions multiple times. Duplicate inclusion of transactions is still a violation of constraints and leads to the entire block being marked as invalid. This does not depend on account state, which is why I think this should be left in.

With respect to nonces, we want to avoid depdendence on account state, so cannot check the validity of the nonce account for the question of block validity. However, the nonce acount state must still be checked before execution. If the nonce account does not exist or is otherwise invalid, the transaction is not executed and fees are not charged to the fee-payer.
I view this as a similar situation to the fee-payer check; The block-producer is incentivized to check these states. They are free to do that in some non-strict method, but if done incorrectly, they lose out on rewards and the transaction has no/limited on state and have effectively burned their CUs.

There's an ongoing discussion of if fees should be paid by the block-producer should a transaction be unable to pay. So whether or not the producer gets charged fees in these cases is still an open question.

3. Have program accounts that:
   1. exist
   2. are executable
4. Have writable accounts that are:
   1. not executable, unless owned by
   `BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111`
   2. if owned by `BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111`,
   then `BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111` must be included
   3. if owned by `Stake11111111111111111111111111111111111111`, then the
   current slot must not be within the epoch stakes reward distribution period
5. Have executable `BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111` owned accounts
with `UpgradeableLoaderState::Program` state, and derived program data account
that exist
6. Have a call chain depth of 5 or less
7. Have no builtin loader ownership chains
(pending `4UDcAfQ6EcA6bdcadkeHpkarkhZGJ7Bpq7wTAiRMjkoi`)
8. Have total loaded data size which does not exceed

> requested_loaded_accounts_data_size_limit

Reviewer 3: Can you please add links to the feature documents.

> (pending `DdLwVYuvDz26JohmgSbA7mjpJFgX5zP2dkp8qsF2C33V`)

Author: Tried to be as specific as possible in the document itself, but these constraints (3-8) can be summarized as "transaction must be executable"

Reviewer 4: ＼(^_^)／

The intent with relaxing these constraints is to minimize the amount of
account-state which is required in order to validate a block. This gives more
flexibility to when and how account-state is updated during both block
production and validation.

With these constraints removed, there is still one account-state constraint
at the transaction level: address lookup table resolution.
With this proposal, this constraint is intentionally not relaxed since it is
necessary for validation of entry-level and block-level constraints.
However, if/when those constraints are relaxed, this constraint should be
relaxed as well.

The relaxation of these constraints is only relaxed for transactions being

> included in a block. During block validation, if any of these constraints

Reviewer 5: How does this affect transaction simulation? Currently, we get an error when we simulate transactions where the payer does not have enough balance. This will make these kinds of errors indetectable during transaction simulation.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean. Transaction simulation is unrelated to block invalidation, and doesn't change with this proposal.
You'd still get the same transaction error which indicates it cannot pay for fees.

are broken, the entire block is marked invalid; with this proposal, the
block is not marked invalid, but the transaction will not be executed.
These constraints must still be satisfied in order for the transaction to be

> executed, and have an effect on state. However, there are some new considerations

Reviewer 6: maybe better off being explicit about side-effects on some on-chain states for these constraints-violating transactions. namely, the status cache to avoid repeated inclusion of same transactions.

which must be taken into account, specifically as it relates to fees and block
limits.

### Fee-Paying

Currently, iff a transaction's fee-payer does not have enough funds to pay the
fee, the transaction cannot be included in a block. With this proposal, it is
possible for such a transaction to be included in the block, and there are
three different edge-cases to consider:

1. The fee-payer account does not exist (0 lamports)
2. The fee-payer account does not have enough funds for the entire fee
3. The fee-payer account has enough funds for the fee, but would no longer be
rent-exempt

> In case 1, the transaction should simply be ignored for execution, and have no

Reviewer 5: Should also consider that base fee will eventually change and could be much greater than now.

effect on state.

> In case 2, the fee-paying account should be drained of all funds, but have no

Reviewer 3: probably a good exercise to also enumerate the normal case

> other effect on state.

Author: > With this,

Might have missed a comment this is attached to. With what?

Case 2 would probably not occur if it was a malicious actor, but could happen if some non-strict block-producer made and assumption a fee-payer was good and was not.

> In case 3, the fee-paying account should be drained of all funds, with fees

Reviewer 3: That seems a bit harsh, no?

Author: Potentially this is too harsh. Alternatively we could just drain them to the rent-exempt level.
Not sure which seems fairer. If submitting a transaction that cannot pay fees, they **should** be punished imo.

Reviewer 7: Imho, since the commission is paid, the transaction should be executed. Deleting the account is a different event.

> being paid to the block-producer, and the remainder of lamports being dropped.

Reviewer 6: `dropped` => `burnt`?

> 

Reviewer 5: Could burn lots of SOLs if you create big accounts and use the same accounts as a payer. Should be okay though if anyone wants to burn their SOLs through an obscure mechanism.

### Block-Limits

> Pending the activation of `2ry7ygxiYURULZCrypHhveanvP5tzZ4toRwVp89oCNSj`,

Reviewer 3: Please add a link.

Reviewer 5: SIMD should stand for itself and should not have any links, as far as i know.

Reviewer 3: It at least needs to describe the feature.

validators must validate a block is within block-limits.
With this proposal, some transactions may not be executable, but will still
count towards block-limits.

> If these transactions did not count towards block-limits, the validation of

Reviewer 3: How do they specifically contribute to block limits.

block-limits would require the validator to check whether or not a transaction

> is executable, which negates the benefits of this proposal.

Reviewer: I think the case here is "producer builds a block of 48M cu, but validator only spent less than 48M to execute all transactions (as some of TXs are failed and not executed)", and this should be OK (except the DoS vector - that entire block is unexecutable txs, which can be addressed by making producer pay for these unexecutable txs)

> Additionally, f these transactions did not count towards block-limits, a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, if these transactions did not count towards block-limits, a
```

malicious leader could produce a block with non-executable transactions and
overload the network.

## Impact

> - Transactions that would previously be dropped with an error, can now be
>   included, and even charged fees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Transactions that would previously be dropped with an error without paying fees, can now be
  included and will be charged fees.
```

I think "and even charged fees" doesn't sound declarative enough. My understanding is that the crux of this SIMD is that before we dropped txs for a variety of reasons and didn't charge fees and after we will allow invalid txs to be in a block and will charge fees for them.

  - Users must be more careful when constructing transactions to ensure they

>     are executable if they don't want to waste fees

Author: Simulation doesn't change. It currently would tell you that your transaction had an error. That error doesn't change, it only changes what will happen to a block it may be included in.

For example, if a transaction had an invalid program account, simulation will still return `ProgramAccountNotFound` error.
If the user simulates, and then still submits that transaction, then they probably deserve to be charged, imo.

- The validity of a block is no longer dependent on intra-block account-state
updates. This is because the only account-state required for transaction
validation is the ALT resolution, which is resolved at the beginning of a slot.
  - Block-production could be done asynchronously
  - Block-validation could be done without execution, but still relies on the
  execution of previous blocks.

## Security Considerations

- Removing fee-paying requirement could allow validator clients to produce
  blocks that do not pay fees. If not checked by block-producer, this could
  allow malicious users to abuse such producers/leaders.

> 

Reviewer 6: also, malicious leaders could create full of garbage blocks, which only contains bad transactions at no cost, burdening all the validations onto other validators, esp, heavy account state lookup.

Reviewer 2: agreed with @ryoqun, this attack vector is the main thing that needs to be solved. Maybe this specific problem can be discussed in a separate SIMD since relaxing other transaction constraints is more straightforward.

Author: made a comment in this chain: https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/82#discussion_r1393361600

I don't think there's a DOS that's creating more work than would be possible within current protocol.
I can currently create a block thats full of **valid** heavy transactions, and then tag in some invalidating transaction at the last tick. All the validators wasted their time executing all those txs, and there's no reward for them since the block is thrown out entirely.

This would change the vector, since they could have **all** txs that do not pay fees. But, that only makes the execution less intense, since they still have a cost that counts towards block limits.

## Drawbacks

- Any dynamic fees based on block utilization cannot/should not reward the
block-producer directly. Otherwise, this incentivizes block-producers to fill
blocks with non-fee paying transactions in order to raise fees.

> - Non-fee paying transactions included in a block will be recorded in long-term

Reviewer 5: This could be a way to attack the cluster and use more space. A malicious leader could create 48M CU / (CU required to load payer account which currently stands at 0) number of transactions. This could be a massive number of transactions, depending on CUs charge that we decide to load the payer account. If each transaction was given the maximum size of 1280 bytes or eventually more if we include ZK transactions, then I can possibly create a huge block burdening the whole cluster's network resources because of the turbine.

I feel like the leader should be somehow punished/slashed for adding transactions where the payer does not have enough balance.

Author: Currently transactions do have a minimum cost of 1070 CUs = 720 SigVerify + 300 WriteLock.
This corresponds to a maximum of 44776 txs per slot, assuming 48M CU limit.

Additionally, cost has 1 CU per 4 bytes of instruction data. So large ix data txs would cost more than this bare minimum of 1070 CUs as well.
It's still a large number of transactions of 34532 txs per slot.

Author: It's worth noting that currently, all direct rewards are going to the block-producer anyway.
If that large number of transactions were valid fee-paying transactions, it would only be more work for other validators than if they could not pay fees. Either way, other nodes are not directly rewarded for the validation/execution.

There is still some discussion to be had around **indirect** rewards via the burning of SOL in those fees. I think that's potentially a valid reason we may want to force the block-producer into paying fees. Hoping to discuss this more

Reviewer 5: Yeah I agree, block producers should pay a fee as they are using network resources, storage space to transfer invalid transactions. Malicious node can just start creating blocks with invalid transactions of 1280 bytes using 44.20096 MBs/ block in network and storage.

can now be included in a block, but will either not be executed at all, or
will have limited state changes.
The goal is to remove much of the reliance on account-state in order to
validate a block.
This proposal on its' own, will not enable asynchronous execution, but it will
remove one of the barriers to asynchronous execution.

## Alternatives Considered

1. Do nothing
    - This is the simplest option, as we could leave the protocol as is.
    However, this leaves the protocol more complex than it needs to be.
2. Also relax fee-paying constraint
    - This was considered, and included in the intially reviewed proposal.
    However, this was decided to be moved to a separate follow-up proposal,
    should this one be accepted.
    There was significant disagreements on how exactly transactions that cannot
    pay fees should be handled.
    By keeping fee-paying as a constraint for the current proposal, it will
    allow this proposal to be accepted more quickly, which will give
    significant benefits to the network.
3. Additionally, relax the address lookup table resolution constraint
    - This was considered, since it is a transaction-level constraint that is

>     depdendent on account-state. However, due to entry-level and block-level

Reviewer 8: small typo here @apfitzge 

"depdendent"

Author: Thanks! Found a few other spelling, consistency, or grammar issues while fixing it.
Pushed the fixes.

    constraints that rely on the address lookup table resolution, this
    constraint cannot easily be relaxed without also relaxing those
    constraints.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

### Current Protocol-Violation Errors

Prior to this change, the list of protocol violation errors at the individual
transaction level are:

1. Transaction must be deserializable via `bincode` (or equivalent) into a structure:

    ```rust
    pub struct VersionedTransaction {
        #[serde(with = "short_vec")]
        pub signatures: Vec<Signature>,
        pub message: VersionedMessage,
    }
    ```

    where `Signature` and `VersionedMessage` are defined in `solana-sdk`.

> 2. Transaction serialized side must be less than or equal to 1232 bytes.

Author: 6d6200b22964baaa09f31f2bc076ff63ca7917a4

7. Transactions that use address lookup tables must be resolvable:
    - The address lookup table account must exist.
    - The address lookup table account must be owned by the address lookup
      table program: `AddressLookupTab1e1111111111111111111111111`
    - The address lookup table account data must be deserializable into
      `AddressLookupTable` as defined in `solana-sdk`.
    - All account table indices specified in the transaction must be less than
      the number of active addresses in the address lookup table.
8. Transactions containing pre-compile instructions must pass pre-compile
   verification checks.
9. The transaction must not load the same account more than once.
10. The transaction must have fewer than 64 accounts.
    - The limit is subject to change to 128 with the activation of
      `9LZdXeKGeBV6hRLdxS1rHbHoEUsKqesCC2ZAPTPKJAbK`.
11. The `recent_blockhash` of the transaction message must be valid:
    - It must exist and not have an age greater than 150.
    - OR the transaction must be a nonced transaction, and the nonce
      account must exist and be valid for the given `recent_blockhash`.
12. The transaction must not have already been processed.

> 13. The transaction fee-payer account must:

Author: dc42394b40e4221fb3ec9bcce685c7c5b6bd2ec9

    - exist
    - be owned by the system program: `11111111111111111111111111111111`
    - have more lamports than the fee
    - have more lamports than the fee plus the minimum balance
14. Any non-writable program accounts used in the transaction must exist,

>     regardless of if they are used in any instructions.

Reviewer 2: This rule doesn't really make any sense and should be removed

Author: Yeah think this comes from me translating code -> requirements, since we have no official spec.

Code logic has a check for this later on, but we identify programs earlier from the account-data...if we identified it as a program it has to exist.

Reviewer 2: In order to identify an account as a program, it surely exists already. That's the part that doesn't make sense to me

Author: 561b44f7947321f43537f77f02d55d568df550a2

15. The total loaded data size of the transaction must not exceed
    `requested_loaded_accounts_data_size_limit`, or the default limit (64MB).
16. Any account used as a program in a top-level instruction must:
    - be the native loader: `NativeLoader1111111111111111111111111111111`
    - OR
      - exist
      - be executable
      - be owned by the native loader: `NativeLoader1111111111111111111111111111111`
    - OR
      - exist
      - be executable
      - the owner account be owned by the native loader: `NativeLoader1111111111111111111111111111111`
      - the owner account must be executable

> 

Reviewer 9: We need a complete test suite that tests every single one of these constraints (via txn execution) so that we can also test the behavior when the feature flag is flipped to make sure we relax all the correct constraints

Author: Yes, any client should be testing against the protocol, and those tests much change if the protocol changes.

There should already (big should in our codebase...) be tests for all these cases, as they are currently protocol violations, that we must check for.
Tests can be modified to use feature-flag which would change the result of processing pipeline from rejected -> not executed.

### Proposed Protocol-Violation Errors

The proposal is to move some items of the above list from protocol violations
to runtime errors.
Specifically, the following constraints will remain as protocol violations:

1. Transaction must be deserializable via `bincode` (or equivalent) into a structure:

    ```rust
    pub struct VersionedTransaction {
        #[serde(with = "short_vec")]
        pub signatures: Vec<Signature>,
        pub message: VersionedMessage,
    }
    ```

    where `Signature` and `VersionedMessage` are defined in `solana-sdk`.

> 2. Transaction serialized side must be less than or equal to 1232 bytes.

Author: 6d6200b22964baaa09f31f2bc076ff63ca7917a4

3. Transaction signatures must be valid and in the same order as the static

>    account keys in the `VersionedMessage`.

Author: Yeah, but that was a separate change not part of this SIMD.

>    account keys in the `VersionedMessage`.

Reviewer 2: Ok maybe rather than having a single all encompassing SIMD for transaction constraints, we limit this one to account loading related constraints?

    - The sum of the number of required signatures and the number of read-only
      unsigned accounts must not be greater than the number of static account
      keys.
    - The number of readonly signed accounts must be less than the number of
      required signatures.
    - Each lookup table, if present, must be used to load at least one account.
    - The total number of accounts, static or dynamic, must be less than 256.
    - Each instruction's `program_id_index` must be less than the number of
      static account keys.
    - Each instruction's `program_id_index` must not be the payer index (0).
    - All account indices in instructions must be less than the number of total
      accounts.
7. Transactions that use address lookup tables must be resolvable:
    - The address lookup table account must exist.
    - The address lookup table account must be owned by the address lookup
      table program: `AddressLookupTab1e1111111111111111111111111`
    - The address lookup table account data must be deserializable into
      `AddressLookupTable` as defined in `solana-sdk`.
    - All account table indices specified in the transaction must be less than

>       the number of active addresses in the address lookup table.

Author: Plan was for this to be in a separate follow-up SIMD since the choice here is very much not obvious imo.

How do we apply CUs to account-level cost if we cannot resolve ALTs?

>       the number of active addresses in the address lookup table.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with it being covered in a separate SIMD
